The White House released two reports in May relating to Big Data and Privacy. The first report, entitled [Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving Values](http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/big_data_privacy_report_may_1_2014.pdf) is the result of a 90-day study by members of the Obama Administration that examines how big data will transform the way we live and work. The second report, entitled [Big Data And Privacy: A Technological Perspective](http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_big_data_and_privacy_-_may_2014.pdf) is a report by the resident’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology that examines the nature of current technologies for managing and analyzing big data and for preserving privacy. Together, these reports are intended to stimulate the law and policy discussions around privacy in the ever increasingly connected world in which we live.

Both reports reflect on the current concerns about Big Data and the substantial increase in the amount of data being collected. Both reports also acknowledge the tremendous value and benefit that Big Data technology can bring to both individuals and society as a whole. The promise of Big Data includes improved energy delivery and energy efficiency, boosting agricultural productivity, projecting the spread of infectious diseases, economic productivity, improved consumer and government services, thwarting terrorism and improved health care to save lives. 

Both reports also acknowledge that new opportunities bring new challenges. The challenges include protecting against the harmful consequences to individuals and groups. While the reports recommend the continued use of technology to protect privacy, they also conclude that the technology can only be effective if accompanied by laws and regulations that provide both deterrence of harmful actions and incentives to deploy privacy protecting technologies. Both reports advocate greater focus on privacy laws and regulations that are directed to the appropriate use of data and metadata, as well as for advancing a better Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights and passing National Data Breach legislation. 

One concern is that the reports suggest that policy focusing on limiting data collection is not a broadly applicable or scalable strategy. Ignoring data collection could be problematic because some of the very foundations of privacy concern the collection of private information—“the concern that ‘[i]nstantaneous photographs and newspaper enterprise have invaded the sacred precincts of private and domestic life; and numerous mechanical devices threaten to make good the prediction that what is whispered in the closet shall be proclaimed from the house‐tops’” (The Big Data and Privacy Report quotes this portion of the famous 1890 Warren and Brandeis article “The Right to Privacy.”) Historically, rules and regulations directed to data collection have not been broadly applicable or scalable because they have been limited to a specific (new at time) technology—consider, for example, the Wire Tap Laws, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act and the Stored Communications Act that makeup the patchwork of laws designed to protect privacy in specific contexts. To avoid falling behind the technology, the reports advocate for policies and regulations that are stated in terms of intended outcomes without embedding particular technological solutions. 

This blog post is just a brief overview of some of the issues raised in the reports. Whether these reports serve to stimulate discussion and produce a much needed overhaul of the patchwork of laws and regulations that currently protect our privacy remains to be seen. Future posts will more specifically address the conclusions of the reports.
